---
title: 'My first home'
date: '2021-10-04'
summary: 'Learn more about my recent, first home purchase'
---

Last December, I decided to buy a house with my sister. Throughout the process, I experienced many different emotions; I felt happy, excited, nervous, anxious and even scared. Would this adventure we were embarking on work out in our favor? I wondered if all new homeowners experienced these emotions and if so, how could I do my part in educating new home buyers so that their experiences are smooth.

When I kicked off our search for a new home, I wanted to make sure I had an experienced and sharp realtor on my side who could guide me through the hectic home buying process. I secured one through the website biggerpockets.com. Some of you may be familiar with this website, others of you may not be. Regardless, it is a terrific resource for first time home buyers or anyone who is interested in using real estate as an investment vehicle in order to build long-term and sustainable wealth.

I believe that investors who are curious about real estate and want to learn how to take advantage of this incredible tool for building wealth should understand that it is important to find your niche in real estate. What do I mean by finding your niche? If you’re interested in using real estate as an investment vehicle, you will do yourself a favor if you think about what types of properties you’re interested in investing in. Do you want to create passive, cash flow by investing in commercial real estate? Perhaps you find a multi-unit building more appealing. A single family home is often a great idea as well. At the end of the day, buying a home is no simple task. Understanding the value of recruiting a seasoned and experienced real estate investor can add immediate impact and value to your search.

When you’ve decided on a niche, you must understand that not all real estate agents are created equal. It is unfortunate, but there are realtors out there who simply want to earn a commission, regardless of whether the deal is a good one for you or not. Some of these agents may not be familiar with housing market trends or conditions. When I was searching for a realtor, I managed to narrow the playing field down to 5 agents. I trimmed that number down to 3, even though all 5 were experienced, seemed trustworthy and knew the Chicago real estate market well. I spoke to each of them for a while because I wanted to get to know them personally and determine if they would be a good partner on my home buying journey. I wanted someone with a similar personality to mine. I’m a fast paced, go getter type and that’s the type of realtor I was looking for. Someone to match my energy.

Once you decide on an agent, tell them what your long term goals and plans are. Discuss your niche, how realistic your future plans in real estate and most importantly, listen to them. He or she will work with you to put a plan of action together. I cannot emphasize enough the importance of a reliable, honest and compatible real estate agent.

At this point, you’ve found the perfect agent for you; one that understands your goals and plans, your niche and how to turn your real estate dreams into a reality. With this critical player on your team, it is now time to shift focus to finding a lender who can help you get a competitive interest rate on your loan. If you are going to buy a single property, my advice is to go with the lender that gives you the lowest rate. However, if your interests expand beyond that, talk to them about these plans to come up with a plan. There will be more to consider if you go down this route, and your lender, as well as your realtor, can help you plan accordingly.

Just like with the agent, I spoke to many different lenders until I found one that I felt both comfortable with and developed enough confidence in this individual that if I needed to in the future, I could once again retain their services. Once you are decided on a lender, I’d like to share some tips and tricks for you to make this part of the process easier for you. First off, do not withdraw and deposit more than 5K; your lender may ask questions. I was fortunate in that my sister was able to provide some investing capital so we were able to comfortably side step some of these inquiries, but it made the process stressful.

Secondly, after your closing, the lender will transfer your loan to another mortgage company. This process takes roughly 2 to 3 weeks. Throughout this process, you will receive a lot of ads for your home. Do not fall for this click bait, even if it sounds too good to be true.

Third, now that you have a realtor and lender on your side, it’s time to find a lawyer and an insurance agent to add to your real estate dream team. The insurance broker is an important addition to your team because it’s important to understand not all insurance bundling packages can save you money and with the right insurance agent on your side, this process will be less of a hassle. It is important to keep in mind that similar to how you shopped around for a competitive mortgage interest rate, you must do so again for homeowners insurance. Not doing so can cause major financial setbacks, up to 10x the amount charged by the lender in some cases.

In summary, the first time home buying experience can be nerve wracking and intimidating. Finding a real estate broker who fits your personality, an experienced mortgage lender, a lawyer who specializes in real estate law and a reliable and trustworthy insurance broker are core parts of your team that you should carefully select. With these players on your team, the process of buying your first home is well within reach. Stay tuned for more real estate tips and tricks as well as other general investing musings in the next blog post.
